once around teleyos.
So this goes back to a detection by the
ASCAP array. This ASCAP array is a radio
telescope in the Australian desert and
the acronym you have to have a good
acronym these days for any piece of
equipment. Stands for the Australian
square kilometer array path finder but
ASCAP so much easier to say. and it
spotted a strangely symmetrical
spherical object thousands of light
years away in the sky glowing in the
radio part of the spectrum but with no
optical counterpart when the initial
follow-up was done. Now, ASCAP is a
technology demonstrator for the
full-blown SKA, the square kilometer
array, which is going to consist of
thousands of dishes in Australia and in
South Africa. But here we have just 36
identical parabolic dishes 12 m in
diameter linked together as an
intererometer. So using aperture
synthesis to create the effect of one
much larger disc in terms of resolution
um and also adding the area of all the
dishes together you get the area of a
larger dish 4,000 square meters of
collecting area. Um but the resolution
of course is not determined by the size
of the dishes but by the distance
between the most distant pairing. uh a
technique that was developed here in
Cambridge by Martin Riyle shortly after
World War II with the first uh radio
observatories and a lot of surplus radar
equipment.
So this objectios also known as
G305.4-2.2
two, I'm going to stick to telesios.
It's from the Greek and it means
perfect, complete, mature or having
reached its end or its final state. And
in this case, it's referring to the
perfect circularity or perfect sphere of
this weird construct out there in
nature. Now, we get a lot of circular
things in uh astronomy, but they're not
usually quite this perfectly round.
They're usually a bit more asymmetrical.
They might be exploding stars or dying
stars or planets or stars themselves or
rings of material in colliding galaxies.
We get rings all the time, but they're
always a bit unsymmetrical.
This one is not. It's perfect teleyos.
But there are three different competing
suggestions as to what's going on here.
The first two are both saying that it's
a type 1A supernova, an exploding white
dwarf star that's reached the end of its
life, uh, accreted more material onto
it, hit the Chandra Seca limit, and then
exploded in a giant detonation,
destroying utterly the, uh, the white
dwarf. But the first one reckons this
was a thousand years ago and that tellio
the shell of material giving off the
radio waves is 46 light years in
diameter and 7,175
light years away. The other group are
claiming that it's 25,000 light years
away, 157 light years in diameter, and
10 times as old, 10,000 years. So quite
a big difference between them and um uh
well we'll see. But the third competing
theory is that it's a slightly different
explosion of a white dwarf called a type
1A x supernova. And this is where the
detonation fails to completely destroy
the star. And these are rather rare and
we're beginning to understand them now.
They are fainter than the other two
types of type 1A supernova because they
don't consume all of the core of the
star in a burst of runaway uh
destruction. And so lower power means
that for the same apparent brightness
you would have to be nearer. And so this
is saying that we're 11 light years and
uh in diameter and 3,200
light years across. So, three rather
different estimates. And the interesting
thing about type 1A supernovi is the
nature of the star that survives this
explosion. And we call those zombie
stars. And I might do a talk all about
zombie stars at some point. Perhaps I'll
do it for Halloween. You never know.
But these are not the only things that
the ASCAP system has detected. It's
detected
and it's detected ORC one. Very Lord of
the Rings Orc. I suspect that's where
that's come from. But it's supposed to
stand for odd radio circles. We're
really getting desperate with the names,
aren't we? And these are only visible in
the radio spectrum to begin with again.
So here's a picture of an orc. And it's
not as round as teleyios, but it's
similar in many ways. This was imaged
with the mircat array. And then the
image has been pasted onto its position
against the background using the dark
energy survey image here. And you can
see in the background there's quite a
lot of faint galaxies, the really red
ones, and one slightly nearer by one,
but looks a bit twisted and warped. Now,
I suspect that's going to be because
it's been gravitationally lensed by a
more massive object in the middle,
perhaps where the orc is sitting. We
don't know. But I've got this fantastic
image sequence that I just want to show
you coming up next
of what we think is going on with these
radio circles, these odd radio circles.
And really, I just wanted to show you
this. Here it goes. Look at this. Oh,
it's going backwards
and expanding again. And so, we think
this is a sort of impression of there's
the image. It starts with a galaxy and
there's an enormous outburst of
something from a galaxy that we haven't
spotted uh of this enormous spherical
shock wave. So, this is probably what we
think is happening with um the uh odd
radio circles, the orcs,
but maybe it's also happening with
Teleyios and we're just happening to be
looking at it in a direction that makes
an ellipse look like a perfect circle.
And so, there is the final image of
Teleyios for you. And I expect we will
learn more about these objects as our
technology is getting better and better
all the time. So, thanks very much for
listening and if I hear any more about
this story, I'll certainly come back to
it.